In this lecture, you'll learn about the different Spanning Tree versions.
There have been a few different versions over time, which have improved on the previous versions.
Now, when I was first learning about this from other sources, it was super confusing.
But there is actually a simple way to explain it, which is by breaking it down into the open standards
and also into the Cisco proprietary versions.
So that's what I'm going to do for you here,
starting off with the open standards. The first original implementation of Spanning Tree was 802.1D.
That uses one Spanning Tree for all of the different VLANs in the LAN,
so just one instance for everything. That was improved with version 802.1w, which is
Rapid Spanning Tree.
So that improved Spanning Tree by significantly improving the convergence time. With 802.1D, it can
take up to 50 seconds for an interface to make sure that there's no loops there and transition into
the forwarding state. With Rapid Spanning Tree, that gets down to typically a few seconds. Rapid Spanning
Tree also uses one Spanning Tree instance for all
VLANs in the LAN.
The latest of the industry standards is 802.1s, which is Multiple Spanning Tree. That
enables grouping and mapping VLANs into different Spanning Tree instances, which allows you to
do load balancing.
To summarise, 802.1D, the original implementation,
it's got very slow convergence time and it doesn't support any load balancing. 802.1w
came out after that, which improved the convergence time, but also did not support load balancing.
The latest one, 802.1s, builds on Rapid Spanning Tree by keeping the improved convergence
time
and it also enables load balancing as well.
So let's have a look and see how the load balancing works.
The Access Layer switches in our example here, have got PCs which are attached in multiple different VLANs.
We're going to make CD1, the Core Distribution Switch 1, the Root Bridge for VLANs 10 to 19.
So now, traffic for those VLANs is going to be forwarded on the link to CD1 and blocked on the link
to CD2.
So we're looking at it from the point of view of our Access Layer switch, Acc3 here. So when we configure
this, traffic for VLANs 10 to 19 are going to go up the uplink to CD1.
CD2 is going to be made the Root Bridge for VLANs 20 to 29.
So traffic for those
VLANs are going to go up the link to CD2, and it will be blocked on CD1. So half my traffic goes in
the uplink to CD1, half the traffic goes in the uplink to CD2.
If either one of those uplinks fails, then all traffic will failover to using the one link, and with
MSTP, Multiple Spanning Tree, we're going to have two Spanning Tree instances running, one for each
group of VLANs.
So that's how it allows us to do load balancing,
and those were the open standards.
Okay, next up, we'll look at the Cisco
proprietary versions.
The first one is PVST+. This came out around the same time as 802.1D, but it included Cisco's
enhancements.
The main enhancement is it uses a separate Spanning Tree instance for every VLAN.
So Per VLAN Spanning Tree+ (PVST+) allows you to do load balancing, the same as Multiple
Spanning Tree does.
But because this came out about the same time as the original 802.1D, it's got the same issues
with having a very long convergence time.
PVST+ is the default on Cisco switches. So the default on Cisco switches,
you've got a separate Spanning Tree instance for every single VLAN and it's got slow convergence time.
The next Cisco version was Rapid Per VLAN Spanning Tree+ (RPVST+).
This came out at around the same time as 802.1w which, if you remember from the open standards
was the second implementation, which had a faster convergence time.
So Rapid PVST+ also significantly improves the convergence time over PVST+. Like PVST+,
it uses a separate Spanning Tree instance for every VLAN. Now MST, the industry standard,
with that, you can group multiple VLANs into the same Spanning Tree instance.
But with the Cisco versions, PVST+ and RPVST+, they use a separate Spanning Tree
instance for every single individual VLAN.
So looking at the load balancing with PVST+ or Rapid PVST+, same example that we covered before,
and again here, CD1 is going to be made the Root Bridge for VLANs 10 to 19.
CD2 is the Root Bridge for VLANs 20 to 29. So VLANs 10 to 19
go over the left hand path up to CD1, VLANs 20 to 29 go over the right hand path
to CD2.
So far, it's looking exactly the same as MST.
The difference is with MST, we grouped the VLANs. So with MST,
we had one group going up the left hand side,
we had another group going up the right hand side.
So we had two Spanning Tree instances. With PVST+ and Rapid PVST+,
you can't group the VLANs.
You have a separate instance for each one.
So rather than having two total instances like we had with MST, here we're going to have 20 separate
instances, one for each individual VLAN.
So the Cisco versions PVST+ and Rapid PVST+, they put a bit more load on the switch because
it has to calculate Spanning Tree instances at the VLAN level rather than being able to do it at
the group level.
Okay, so those are the different versions of Spanning Tree.
For which versions will be supported on your switch,
it depends on the particular model of switch that you're using.
PVST+ will always be supported.
That will be the default.
It will usually also support Rapid PVST+ as well and possibly, depending on the model of switch,
it may also support MST,
the open standard Multiple
Spanning Tree. One last thing to tell you, PVST+, which is the default on Cisco switches will assign
the Root, Designated, or Alternate role to ports.
We spoke about our Root, and our Designated, and our Blocking ports in the last lecture,
just giving you terminology here.
The Alternate ports are your Blocking ports with PVST+.
Okay, that was the whole thing. We'll look next at
how to actually monitor and verify Spanning Tree in the next lecture.